Welcome back to the second
module of the course.
In this module, we will cover
a number of basic principles and
techniques of graph analytics.
As we mentioned in the last module,
the goal of graph analytics
is to utilize the mathematical
properties of data and provide
efficient algorithmic solutions for large
and complex graph structure problems.
As I said, in this module, we'll learn a
number of basic graph analytic techniques.
After this module,
you'll be able to identify the right
class of techniques to apply for
a graph analytics problem.
To be more specific,
in this module we will consider
the mathematical and
algorithmic aspects, and not so
much the computing frameworks
to implement these methods.
In Modules 3 and 4, we will look at
two different kinds of computing
platforms that are used for implementing
the techniques discussed in this module.
Here is the lesson plan for the module.
First, we'll discuss a few basic terms and
their definition which we'll use for
the rest of the course.
Of course, they are not the only terms and
concepts we will learn.
As we go through each technique,
we will add more terms and
definitions in our vocabulary.
Now following these definitions we
will consider four categories of
graph analytic procedures.
The first, called Path Analytics,
is centered around the Analytic Techniques
where the primary objective involves
traversing to the nodes and
edges of the ground.
The second analytic technique inquires and
explores the connectivity
pattern of the gaps.
Where the term connectivity pattern
refers to the structure and
organizations of the edges of the graph.
The third analytics category
involves the discovery and
behavior of communities which are closely
interacting entities in a network.
The fourth category, termed Centrality
Analytics, detects and characterizes
significant nodes of a network with
respect to a specific analysis problem.
Of course there are many more types of
graph analytic techniques that we'll cover
in the course.
We'll provide some additional reading
material for those who are interested.
But we start by recapitulating
our definition of graphs
as a collection of vertices and edges,
which represent ordered pairs of nodes.
While this mathematical
definition is indeed correct,
in practice it needs to be extended to
give you other information elements.
Let us consider a single Tweet.
As we have mentioned previously,
a Tweet is a complex information output
because it is a graph in itself
with several nodes and edges.
But over and about the structure, a Tweet
actually contains much more information
and code inside the nodes and edges.
First, there several kinds
of nodes in a Tweet.
For example it has a Tweet node,
a User node, a Media node,
a URL node, a hashtag node and so forth.
This assignment of kinds or labels to
nodes is often called node typing.
Every graph application will
have its own set of types.
And it'll assign one or more types to
a node but it is not mandatory for
an application to use node types.
Mathematically we can extend our original
definition with two more elements.
The set of node types and the mapping
function that assigns types to nodes.
That means it associates
a type to every node.
However, not all nodes need to have
a type but in many applications they do.
In addition to types,
a node also has attributes and values.
In our Tweet example,
text is the name of an attribute that
refers to the textual body of the Tweet
whose value is a character string
written by the author of the Tweet.
For a specific kind of data like a Tweet,
one has a fixed set of attributes
as decided by Twitter.
This collection of attributes
is called a node schema.
For a general graph,
a node schema may have an arbitrary
number of attribute value pairs.
We will revisit this in module 3
when we discuss graphing the models.
Similarly, at edge of a graph, we have
an edge type, also called an edge label.
Also just like a node,
an edge may have an edge schema
consisting of attribute value pierce.
Here, Interaction Type is
an attribute in our biological
network that describes the modality of
interaction between a pair of genes.
For the specific edge we have highlighted,
the genes interact through
biochemical activity.
Because they are party to
some biochemical process.
Clearly, there are different kinds
of interaction between these
genes or proteins.
That means an attribute called
interaction type can have a set of
possible values like physical,
genetic and so on.
This set of possible values is
called the domain of the attribute.
Putting these elements back
into our mathematical model,
we get a more concrete specification of
what a real live graph would contain.
We have already discussed edge types
as well as node and edge properties.
Take a minute to look through this again.
Whenever you consider an application that
needs graph analytics, the first task
should be to determine the informational
model of the graph your application needs.
It's always a good exercise to
document the information model,
in terms of the elements
described on the slide.
Let's see a little more on
the topic of edge properties.
Many application encode different
kids of numeric knowledge
into edges of a graph in
the form of edge points.
If we do not put weights
in an adjacency metrics,
an edge is just represented by
placing a one in the appropriate cell.
However, if we do use a weight,
the weight value can be placed in
the adjacency matrix to facilitate
down stream computation as
we'll show in the next lesson.
What do the weights mean?
That depends on the application.
Let's see some examples.
The most obvious example is a road map
where the nodes are road intersections and
the edges represent
stretches of the street or
highway between these intersections.
The edge weight can represent the distance
of a particular segment of the road.
In a personal communication network,
for example an email network,
we can count the average number of emails
per week sent from John to Jill and
use it as a proxy for
the strength of their connection.
So more emails means
a stronger connection.
In a biological network, one often has
to assess whether an interaction that
can occur is actually likely to occur
given the concentration of the reactants,
the chemical environment at the site
of the reaction and so forth.
This is represented as a weight that
designates the likelihood of interaction.
Finally, consider a knowledge network
where nodes represent entities
like people, places and events.
And edges represent relationships
like a person visited a place or
movie actor Tom is dating
movie actress Kim.
Now this kind of information may
be important for some news media.
However, if the information does
not come from an authentic source,
itself, it is more prudent to
put a certainty value on it.
This certainty value may be
treated as a weight on the edge.
Moving on from the information
model of the graph,
the structure of the graph often
contains valuable insights to a graph.
Many of the graph analytic techniques
we will discuss in this section
will consider these structural
properties of graphs.
One such structure is a loop,
which is an edge from a node to itself.
In the example here,
you can see that a protein can interact
with another protein of the same kind.
Many other examples abound.
People send emails to themselves.
A road segment circles back
to the same intersection.
A website has a link to its own URL.
The existence of loops and the nodes that
have such loops can be very informative
in some applications and
can be problematic for other applications.
Another structure property of a graph
is the occurrence of multiple
edges between the same node pair.
The graphs with this feature
are called multi-graphs.
In this example, the two map kinase
genes have five edges between them.
Why multiple edges?
It's because each edge has
a different information content.
In this case,
these two genes can have five different
types of interactions between them.
Where each interaction has a different
value for the attribute interaction type.
We see this all the time
in human networks too.
A person can be my spouse,
a co-performer in music and
my financial adviser,
all at the same time.
Many analytics algorithms
are not natively designed for
multigraphs, and often need a little
customization to handle them.
We will mention some of these
customizations as we go forward and walk
through the different kinds of analytics
applications preformed on graphs.